1
47HOTAN, China — On the edge of a desert in far western China, an imposing building sits behind a barbed-wire fence. Large red characters on the facade urge people to learn Chinese, study law and acquire job skills. Guards make clear that visitors are not welcome.
2
97Inside, hundreds of ethnic Uighur Muslims spend their days in a high-pressure indoctrination program, where they are forced to listen to lectures, sing hymns praising the Chinese Communist Party and write “self-criticism” essays, according to detainees who have been released. The goal is to rid them of devotion to Islam.
3
140Abdusalam Muhemet, 41, said the police detained him for reciting a verse of the Quran at a funeral. After two months in a nearby camp, he and 36 others were ordered to renounce their past lives. Mr. Muhemet said he went along but quietly seethed.
4
165“That was not a place for getting rid of extremism,” he recalled. “That was a place that will breed vengeful feelings and erase Uighur identity.”
5
221This camp outside Hotan, an ancient oasis town in the Taklamakan Desert, is one of hundreds that China has built in the past few years, part of a campaign of breathtaking scale and ferocity that has swept up hundreds of thousands of Chinese Muslims for weeks or months of “brainwashing”, usually without criminal charges. 
6
255Though limited to China’s western region of Xinjiang, it is the country’s most sweeping internment program since the Mao era — and the focus of a growing chorus of international criticism.
7
315China has sought for decades to restrict the practice of Islam and maintain an iron grip in Xinjiang, a region almost as big as Alaska where more than half the population of 23 million belongs to Muslim ethnic minorities. Most are Uighurs, whose religion, language and culture, and history of independence movements and resistance to Chinese rule, have long unnerved Beijing.
8
359After a succession of violent anti-government attacks reached a crescendo in 2014, the Communist Party chief, Xi Jinping, sharply escalated the crackdown, orchestrating an unforgiving drive to turn ethnic Uighurs and other Muslim minorities into loyal citizens and supporters of the party.
9
397“Xinjiang is in an active period of terrorist activities, intense struggle against separatism and painful intervention to treat this,” Mr. Xi said in an internal speech, according to local officials quoted in the state news media in April.
10
441In addition to the mass detentions, the authorities have intensified the use of informers and expanded police surveillance, even installing cameras in some people’s homes. Human rights activists and experts say the campaign has traumatized Uighur society, leaving behind fractured communities and families.
11
479“Penetration of everyday life is almost really total now,” said Michael Clarke, an expert on Xinjiang at Australian National University in Canberra. “You have ethnic identity, Uighur identity in particular, being singled out as this kind of pathology.”
12
522China has categorically denied reports of abuses in Xinjiang. At a meeting of a United Nations panel in Geneva last month, it said it does not operate re-education camps and described the facilities in question as mild corrective institutions that provide job training.
13
556“There is no arbitrary detention,” Hu Lianhe, an official with a role in Xinjiang policy, told the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. “There is no such thing as re-education centers.”
14
598The committee pressed Beijing to disclose how many people have been detained and free them, but the Ministry of Foreign Affairs dismissed the demand as having “no factual basis” and said China’s security measures were comparable to those of other countries.
15
645The government’s business-as-usual defense, however, is contradicted by overwhelming evidence, including official directives, studies, news reports and construction plans that have surfaced online as well as the eyewitness accounts of a growing number of former detainees who have fled to countries such as Turkey and Kazakhstan.
16
677The government’s own documents describe a vast network of camps — usually called“transformation-through-education centers” — that has expanded without public debate, specific legislative authority or any system of appeal for those detained.
17
750The New York Times interviewed four recent camp inmates from Xinjiang who described physical and verbal abuse by guards; grinding routines of singing, lectures and self-criticism meetings; and the gnawing anxiety of not knowing when they would be released. Their accounts were echoed in interviews with more than a dozen Uighurs with relatives who were in the camps or had disappeared, many of whom spoke on condition of anonymity to avoid government retaliation.
18
799The Times also discovered reports online written by teams of Chinese officials who were assigned to monitor families detained with relatives, and a study published last year that said officials in some parts of Xinjiang were indiscriminately sending ethnic Uighurs to the camps to meet numerical quotas.
19
849The study, by Qiu Yuanyuan, a scholar at the Xinjiang Party School, where officials are trained, warned that the detentions could backfire and fan radicalism.“Recklessly setting quantitative goals for transformation-through-education has been erroneously used” in some areas, she wrote. “The targeting is imprecise, and the scope has been expanding.”
20
852Eradicating a ‘Virus’
21
864The long days in the re-education camp usually began with a jog.
22
899Nearly every morning, Mr. Muhemet recalled, he and dozens of others — college graduates, businessmen, farmers — were told to run around an assembly ground. Impatient guards sometimes slapped and shoved the older, slower inmates, he said.
23
940Then they were made to sing rousing patriotic hymns in Chinese, such as “Without the Communist Party, There Would Be No New China.” Those who could not remember the words were denied breakfast, and they all learned the words quickly.
24
1011Mr. Muhemet, a stocky man who ran a restaurant in Hotan before fleeing China this year, said he spent seven months in a police cell and more than two months in the camp in 2015 without ever being charged with a crime. Most days, he said, the camp inmates assembled to hear long lectures by officials who warned them not to embrace Islamic radicalism, support Uighur independence or defy the Communist Party.
25
1064The officials did not ban Islam but dictated very narrow limits for how it should be practiced, including a prohibition against praying at home if there were friends or guests present, he said. In other sessions, the inmates were forced to memorize laws and write essays criticizing their themselves.
26
1095“In the end, all the officials had one key point,” he said. “The greatness of the Chinese Communist Party, the backwardness of Uighur culture, and the advanced nature of Chinese culture.”
27
1151After two months, Mr. Muhemet’s family was finally allowed to visit the camp, located near “New Harmony Village,” a settlement built as a symbol of friendship between ethnic Uighurs and the majority Han Chinese. “I couldn’t say anything,” he recalled. “I just held my two sons and wife, and cried and cried.”
28
1188The Xinjiang government issued “deradicalization” rules last year that gave vague authorization for the camps, and many counties now run several of them, according to government documents, including requests for bids from construction companies to build them.
29
1251Some facilities are designed for inmates who are allowed to go home at night. Others can house thousands around the clock. One camp outside Hotan has grown in the past two years from a few small buildings to facilities on at least 36 acres, and work to be expand it again, to a size larger than Alcatraz Island, according to satellite photos.
30
1266In government documents, local officials sometimes liken inmates to patients requiring isolation and emergency intervention.
31
1296“Anyone infected with an ideological ‘virus’ must be swiftly sent for the ‘residential care’ of transformation-through-education classes before illness arises,”a document issued by party authorities in Hotan said.
32
1337The number of Uighurs, as well as Kazakhs and other Muslim minorities, who have been detained in the camps is unclear. Estimates range from several hundred thousand to perhaps a million, with exile Uighur groups saying the number is even higher.
33
1384About 1.5 percent of China’s total population lives in Xinjiang. But the region accounted for more than 20 percent of arrests nationwide last year, according to official data compiled by Chinese Human Rights Defenders, an advocacy group, and those figures do not include people in the re-education camps.
34
1428Residents said people have been sent to the camps for visiting relatives abroad; for possessing books about religion and Uighur culture; and even for wearing a T-shirt with a Muslim crescent. Women are sometimes detained because of a transgression by their husbands or sons.
35
1473One official directive warns people to look for 75 signs of “religious extremism,” including behavior that would be considered unremarkable in other countries: growing a beard as a young man, praying in public places outside mosques or even abruptly trying to give up smoking or drinking.
36
1477‘We Are in Trouble’
37
1520Hotan feels as if under siege by an invisible enemy. Fortified police outposts and checkpoints dot the streets every few hundred yards. Schools, kindergartens, gas stations and hospitals are garlanded in barbed wire. Surveillance cameras sprout from shops, apartment entrances and metal poles.
38
1536“It’s very tense here,” a police officer said. “We haven’t rested for three years.”
39
1617This city of 390,000 underwent a Muslim revival about a decade ago. Most Uighurs have traditionally adhered to relatively relaxed forms of Sunni Islam, and a significant number are secular. But budding prosperity and growing interaction with the Middle East fueled interest in and antagonism toward Han Chinese dominance led some in Hotan to embrace stricter Islamic traditions. Men grew long beards, while women wore hijabs that were not a part of traditional Uighur dress.
40
1661Such public displays of Muslim piety have since been stamped out. The long beards and hijabs are gone, and posters in some neighborhoods warn against such dress. Mosques appear poorly attended; people must register to enter and worship under the watch of surveillance cameras.
41
1688The area has also been troubled by deadly attacks on police officers. In 2012, several men made a failed attempt to hijack a plane at the local airport.
42
1738The government shifted to harsher policies in 2009 after protests in Xinjiang’s capital, Urumqi, spiraled into rioting and left nearly 200 people dead. Mr. Xi and his regional functionaries went further, adopting methods reminiscent of Mao’s draconian rule — mass rallies, public confessions and “work teams” assigned to ferret out dissent.
43
1811But they have also leapt into the future, wiring dusty towns and villages across Xinjiang with an intimidating array of technology that has put the region on the cutting edge of programs for surveillance cameras as well as facial and voice recognition. Spending on security in Xinjiang has exploded, with the authorities allocating nearly $8.5 billion for the police, courts and other law enforcement agencies last year, nearly double the previous year’s amount.
44
1837The campaign has polarized Uighur society. Many of the ground-level enforcers are Uighurs themselves, including police officers and officials who staff the camps and security checkpoints.
45
1887“It is important to remember that not all Uighurs are cycling through these camps,” said James Leibold, a professor at La Trobe University in Melbourne who studies Xinjiang. “There are still plenty that are employed by the state and are serving the party out of necessity, or even strategic calculation.”
46
1953Ordinary Uighurs in Hotan must negotiate a steeplechase of checkpoints, sometimes shuffling on and off buses several times to pass through metal detectors, swipe their identity cards or hand over and unlock their mobile phones for inspection by police officers looking for suspicious messages. The controls do not apply evenly; local officials and most Han Chinese residents usually receive a cursory search or are waved through.
47
1981Few dare complain. “We don’t want terrorism, but we are not terrorists,” a Uighur man said to no one in particular as he waited at a checkpoint.
48
2041Under a communal surveillance program, a resident or local cadre is assigned to monitor every 10 families in Xinjiang, reporting on comings and goings and activities deemed suspicious, including praying and visits to mosques. Residents said the police sometimes search homes for forbidden books and items such as prayer mats, using special equipment to check walls and floors for hidden caches.
49
2087The authorities are also gathering biometric data and DNA. Two Uighurs, a former official and a student, said they were ordered to show up at police buildings where officers recorded their voices, took pictures of their heads at different angles and collected hair and blood samples.
50
2140The pressure on Uighur villages intensifies when party “work teams” arrive and take up residence, sometimes living in local homes. The teams ask residents to inform on relatives, friends and neighbors, and investigate their attitudes and contacts, including family ties going back as far as three generations, according to government reports published online.
51
2186One official, an editor for a party journal, published an account last year describing how the authorities in a village in southern Xinjiang lined up relatives of detainees at a public rally to denounce them for “religious extremism” and encourage other families to report similar activities.
52
2212“More and more people are coming forward with information,” the official, Cao Lihai, wrote. “Some parents have personally brought in their children to give themselves up.”
53
2260A Uighur woman in her 20s who asked to be identified only by her surname, Gul, said she came under scrutiny after wearing an Islamic head wrap and reading books about religion and Uighur history, even though she belongs to a largely secular family of officials and teachers.
54
2294Local officials installed cameras at her family’s door — and inside their living room. “We would always have to be careful what we said and what we did and what we read,” she said.
55
2328Every month, Ms. Gul added, a neighborhood official visited and spent at least two hours interviewing her about her movements, thoughts and social contacts. Eventually, the authorities sent her to a full-time re-education camp.
56
2360Ms. Gul, who fled China after being released, recently tried to contact her brother to find out if he was in trouble. He sent a wordless reply, an emoticon face in tears.
57
2380Later, Ms. Gul’s mother sent her another text message: “Please don’t call us again. We are in trouble.”
58
2382Broken Families
59
2414The Chinese government says it is winning a war against Islamic extremism and violent separatism, but many who have emerged from the indoctrination program say it has hardened public attitudes against Beijing.
60
2450“It was of absolutely no use,” said Omurbek Eli, an ethnic Kazakh businessman, of his time held in a camp in 2017. “The outcome will be the opposite. They will become even more resistant to Chinese influence.”
61
2504Small crowds can sometimes be seen outside the larger indoctrination camps, mostly women trying to find or visit their husbands or children. For many families, the disappearance of a loved one into the camps can be devastating, both emotionally and economically — a point reflected in reports posted online by the party’s “work teams.”
62
2542Some of these reports describe Uighur families unable to harvest crops on their own because so many members have been taken away, and one mentioned a mother left to care for five children after her husband was detained.
63
2593One team recalled, with some pride, how it had fought to allow a Uighur man held in a camp to see his newborn daughter for the first time. In another report, an official near Hotan described holding a village meeting to calm the distraught families of those sent to the camps.
64
2653Former detainees and relatives of inmates said the mass internments also break Uighur families by forcing members to disown their kin or separating small children from their parents. Teachers, police officers and other civil servants are often required to sign papers promising to report on family members who criticize the government, keep forbidden books or pray at home, they said.
65
2687A notice this year in Kashgar, a city in western Xinjiang, said children with even one parent in custody could be sent to boarding schools if they were in hardship and about 10 or older.
66
2738“Whether consciously or unconsciously, authorities in Xinjiang have recognized the power of families as an alternative source of authority,” said Rian Thum, a professor at Loyola University in New Orleans who has closely followed the detentions across Xinjiang. “The kind of extreme party loyalty they want has no room for that.”
67
2779Ms. Gul said the camp where she was held was ramshackle enough that children sometimes crept up to a window late at night and whispered to their mothers inside. “Their children would come and say, ‘Mother, I miss you,’” she said.
68
2794“We didn’t say anything,” she added, “because there was a camera inside the cell.”
